# Demos: Class 11 - Intro to Data Science with Numpy

> Welcome to Module 3. You have completed 20% of Python.  Only 80% to go.
> First 2 modules were about getting and applying some of the python language
> If your still struggling with py concepts. Check out [HolyPython](https://holypython.com/)

## Data Science'ish

- Today we head into doing some work with data science.
- **Emphasize** You will not be an expert in Data Science this week.
- The Goal is to get you an introduction and some exposure.
- There is a reason that most data scientists have masters or doctorate degrees.
- A big pre-requisite is to understand ENOUGH about what is going on under the hood (The Python Magic).
  - There is a whole-bunch of math that is going on that we don't need to know specifics.
- Today we are going to take a look at Numpy, why Numpy exists, why other tools build on Numpy, and some other data structures that are used in Data Science.
- Data Science creates creates programs and scripts that can learn on their own experience.
It is not free to do this.  By free, I mean in terms of computational power.  It takes a lot to churn through all of these data sets. It puts quite a load on your CPU or Graphics processor to complete some of these tasks.  Depending on what you are doing and how big your data set is, your computer may whine like a small jet engine.
- We are not going to hit any MAJOR data sets that require a server grade computer to accomplish, but be aware that it will take some computational power and you could see some proccessing delays.
- Our Main Objective is to make sure we are using the tool, and not letting the tool use us.
- In the reading you had an introduction to Numpy Arrays.
  - Numpy arrays are different from plain old Python lists.
  - Python arrays are implemented using lists
    - Don't need to know the size when you start out
    - Don't need to know the date type
    - Can have multiple data types
    - Are mutable (NOTE: Good time for a question on the difference between immutable and mutable.)
  - This makes lists flexible and easy to work with, but not very good to optimize them. (Memory, character iteration)
  - When optimization = need for speed, there are some things that would be very helpful
    - What is the size of the list upon declaration
    - What type of data will be stored (how much memory will be needed for each item)
    - Helps to be immutable (less tracking of things) - Other languages like Java require these things.
  - When SPEED REALLY MATTERS - Python my not be the best option.
    - Because Python is an interpreted language and not fully compiled, it runs through the code at runtime and figures out what it needs to do. In other languages like JAVA or C#, a lot happens during compile, that speed things up.
  - To some of you this may seem confusing. Python is one of the biggest players in data science, I told you earlier that it takes a lot of computation power, but that Python itself is not the best.  Speed really matters in Data Science.  Hmmm, where am I going with this?
  
  QUESTION: How can Python be in-efficient with speed but still be the premier language for Data Science where speed matters?

  - Python can leverage some powerful friends. This is where Numpy comes in.  Numpy was written in C. C is a very performant language. It is a pain to develop in C, no-where near as user-friendly. You will actually find that a lot of Python libraries, especially the ones that are written for data science, are just wrappers of code written in C.  The nice thing about it is you would never know.
  - QUESTION: What does Numpy stand for?
    - Numerical Python
- All of this to say.  Arrays in numpy matters a lot, and we are going to get a chance to play with them today.

## Preview the Lab Assignment

Do a quick overview of today's Lab.

Encourage class to identify risk areas.

## Demo Notebook

> NOTE: Feel free to follow along with what I do, but if you get an error on your end, hold off questions until the end of lecture or when we get to Lab Time.

- Create an account at [Kaggle](https://kaggle.com) if needed.
- From home page click the blue + button to create a new notebook.
- Click on the autogenerated title and name something better, `numpy array fun`
- Make quick note of first cell
  - Particularly about the helpful libraries pre-installed.
  - Also show that Kaggle supports working and temp folders.

> Talk about numpy and pandas iports and convention

Let's run a command

```python
print('Hello World from Kaggle Notebook')
```

> Couple of ways to get this to run
> I can do a shift-enter.
> I can press the play button to run just this cell.
> Add a new Cell with a division by 0, then create a new cell with a print to show the error won't break things
> I can press the button to run everything.
> While you can run each cell individually, subsequent cells will be aware of any global variables.
> Show an example of creating a variable in once cell and printing it in the next.

```python
message = 'Python is fun!'

print(message)
```

> One thing to note

```python
import sys
print(sys.version)
# You will not have access to features above 3.7
```

> This looks like it is running from Top to Bottom, but that is not entirely true.  What matters is the Numbers of execution.

- Add at the beginning in the first cell and talk about execution order.

> Show the clear all output, then restart the server and show the execution clears.
> Run first line again and now we have an error
> Jupyter Notebook can be used for Presentations and is not only for Python
> Create a new Cell and click the Enter Markdown Mode.

```markdown
# My Awesome Notebook Project
```

> This will import Numpy with an alias of np.  This is industry convention to use. np can be anything. Numpy will allow us to see straight data. If we want to visualize data, that will take another library, but we will come back to that.
> let's do some things with numpy arrays.
> We are going to need an 8 x 8 matrix (an array of arrays)
> Numpy makes this very easy. I am not going to waste your time and show you the long way to do this.
> Lets make a board / grid.
> How can we set this up? Well lots of ways. The typical way is to give it a default value.
> You want to be able to give this matrix a certain shape. (matrix is not contained to just 2 dimensions)
> In our case we are going to want: 8 x 8 x 3
> We are going to store values that represent a color in a space called RGB (Red Green Blue) and we are going to want values for each of those.

> One way we can do this is by taking advantages of this numpy array called np.ones()

```python
grid = np.ones()
# Look for shape errir
```

```python
grid = np.ones((8,8))
# Tuple
```

We can access the grid like this

```python
print(grid[0,0])

> This will return an array of ones with the shape and typy of the input.  But how do you know this other than taking my word for this?
> We can see that it is looking for a shape, and we can even see some examples of how to run this.
> In our case we want a 3 dimensional array to be filled with ones.
>
```python
grid = np.ones((8,8,3))
```

> With this we get 3 values in the inner array, 8 rows, and anyone want guess how many sets? 8
> We could also use zeros (change the example to zeros, but change back to ones)

```python
grid = np.zeros((8,8,3))
```

> Because we have a 3 dimensional grid, we can use tools that numpy use for visualization, we can make some assumptions.
> One of them is called matplotlib.  Lets do the import for this now. Update the first cell to this:

```python
%matplotlib inline
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

> NOTE: %matplotlib inline is actually called a python magic function. In some displays, it will add your run code right above your plot.  Not required.
> NOTE: Do not execute the cell yet (unless called out by the class)

> Now we can do some things with plt.  New cell with plt.imshow() but run the help on it.

```python
help(plt.imshow)
plt.imshow()
```

> ERROR.  Uh-oh.  What happen here?  NOTE: We did not re-run the first cell.  Re-run it and then re-run the help.
> If we dig thorough the help we would see that imshow is looking for an ndarray. Well we just happen to have one of those. If this follows some rules on how imshow uses the ndarray, something should happen for us.
>
```python
plt.imshow(grid)
```

> And super cool, we have what looks like a 8 x 8 grid.  We also have the x3 there, just can't see it.
> Any ideas why this appears to be empty?
> If you remember back to HTML RGB, you would give values from 1 to 255.  This determines how far along you are on the 8-bit color scale. That is not how matplotlib works, it wants between 0-1. Think of 1 as full (as compared to html where 255 is full)
> So in html, what is RGB(255, 255, 255).  It is White. What is RGB(0, 0, 0).
> Change to zeros instead of ones and show the block box.
> We definitely have something going on here.
> It is hard to visualize this right now but if we think about what we have here, we have a 8 x 8 grid.
> How could we change the top left grid at 0,0 to white? Ideas? Could we treat it like a list?

```python
grid[0][0]
```

> Run this.  What do we get back? A list of something. It is actually a numpy array, but we get back a collection of 3 things.  We know the 3 zeros is black, how do we make it white? We assign a 3 dimentional color mapping.

```python
grid[0][0] = (1,1,1)
# or
grid[0,0] = (1, 1, 1) # This is numpy specific
blue: (.1, .2, .5)
```

> Didn't break anything. But also didn't change our grid. Oh, that is because we need to execute the grid again.
> BOOM.  There we go. We should feel good about that because it is doing what we thought it would. Do an example of turning off each of the red / green / blue to show the different colors. Change back to ones.

> Any questions here?

> Next we want to color something down and to the right?  Get a student to provide the answer:

```python
grid[0][0] = (0, 0, 0) # Black
grid[0][0] = (1, 0, 0) # Red
grid[0][1] = (0, 0, 1) # Blue
```

>If there is time color the wrong square, then correct it and show that it is still holding on to the shape that was set, the bad square was not reset.

> What if wanted to color a square across the entire diagonal?  How about some sort of loop?  What is the pattern?

> We could do this

```python
grid[0][0] = (0,1,0)
grid[1][1] = (0,1,0)
grid[2][2] = (0,1,0)
grid[3][3] = (0,1,0)
grid[4][4] = (0,1,0)
grid[5][5] = (0,1,0)
grid[6][6] = (0,1,0)
grid[7][7] = (0,1,0)
```

> This makes me sad. Very NOT DRY.

```python
green = (0,1,0)
for i in range(8):
    grid[i][i] = green
```

> Now using this way of thinking, start formulating your pattern to get a true checkerboard / chessboard.
> I won't give that away, that is part of the fun of today's lab.
> We did just a simple grid, but why not use a little more Python?
> How about we create a class in our our notebook?

```python
class Board:
    def __init__(self):
        self.grid = np.zeros((8,8,3))
```

> Then you have a board instance.
> Look at the Lab. Look at the methods it is asking for?
> You will end up with something "close" to this

```python
class Board:
    def __init__(self):
        self.grid = np.zeros((8,8,3))

    def add_red(self, row, col):
        pass

    def add_blue(self, row, col):
        pass

    def render(self):
        pass

    def is_under_attack(self):
        pass
        # Return True if red is under attack?
```

> Explain how queens attack
> Give a quick example that if the 2 queens are on the same row or same column they are under attack.
